LEAVE GENERATION IN WOLGES

A leave is the group of tiles a player keeps after making a play. After you
place tiles (or exchange, or pass), whatever stays on your rack is your leave,
and its quality -- how much easier it makes your next turn -- is worth real
points. The move generator scores each candidate play as the points it makes on
the board plus the value of the leave it would keep, so it needs a table that
maps every possible leave to a value. This file records how that table is
built, how well it plays, and how the choices along the way compare.

Leave values do not add up tile by tile, and that is the whole reason the table
stores a value per leave instead of one number per tile. A lone Q is a burden
and a lone U is a burden, but QU together is good, because the U rescues the Q.
No per-tile score can say that; only a table keyed by the whole kept group can.
In wolges that table is a klv2 file -- a leave-value file, version 2, holding a
32-bit floating-point value per leave with no cap on how large or small a value
it may hold.


TL;DR -- IF YOU JUST WANT A GOOD TABLE

Run this. The census works out every leave's value exactly, one board at a
time, and needs no environment variables:

  cargo run --release --bin leave -- english-census CSW24.kwg - - 4x256

That builds a competitive table with no tuning: 4 generations of 256 boards,
which is enough for the leaves to settle, iterated from the null starting
tables (the two "-"). Every default is already the one to ship. The 256-board
count is measured on this English word list; for a different tile set, let the
adaptive stop described below size the run to the leaves themselves. The census
builds faster than plain self-play or board sampling and plays at least as
well, which is why it is the one to reach for. Those alternatives, and every
lever that turned out not to help, are described below; the best current way to
run each method is collected at the end of this file.


GENERATING A TABLE BY SELF-PLAY

wolges builds a leave table by playing games against itself and learning from
the racks it held. The tools are rudimentary but produce usable tables; run the
two binaries with no arguments to see every option:

  cargo run --release --bin leave
  cargo run --release --bin buildlex

The first step plays games and logs what happened. Each run writes a batch of
games to a randomly named log file such as log-60abcdef; the name depends on
the clock, so do not start two runs in the same second. These three are the
same -- play with no leave table on either side:

  cargo run --release --bin leave -- english-autoplay CSW24.kwg
  cargo run --release --bin leave -- english-autoplay CSW24.kwg - -
  cargo run --release --bin leave -- english-autoplay CSW24.kwg - - 1000000

The two arguments after the word graph are the tables for player 0 and player
1; they need not match, and "-" means no table (the default for both). The last
number is how many games to play.

The second step tallies a log into one row per rack -- the rack, the sum of the
best-play equities seen for it, and how many times it was seen:

  cargo run --release --bin leave -- english-summarize log-60abcdef summary.csv

With bash, several logs combine in one pass:

  cargo run --release --bin leave -- english-summarize <(cat log-*) summary.csv

The third step turns that tally into a leave table, valuing each leave from the
racks that hold it. Each leave's value is the average of the best-play values
of the fuller racks that contain it, where a rack counts more the more often it
came up and the more ways its extra tiles could have been drawn from the bag.
The whole table is then shifted so the empty leave is worth zero. There are two
variants -- smoothed and not (the difference is discussed below):

  cargo run --release --bin leave -- \
    english-generate-no-smooth summary.csv leaves.csv
  cargo run --release --bin leave -- \
    english-generate summary.csv leaves.csv

The fourth step compiles the csv into the binary klv2 the move generator reads:

  cargo run --release --bin buildlex -- english-klv2 leaves.csv leaves.klv2

Feeding a finished table back in as the players' table and repeating from the
first step lets each generation improve on the last:

  cargo run --release --bin leave -- \
    english-autoplay CSW24.kwg leaves.klv2 leaves.klv2

With bash, {,} repeats an argument so both seats share one table without
retyping it:

  cargo run --release --bin leave -- english-autoplay CSW24.kwg leaves.klv2{,}

The genleaves.sh script automates the whole loop -- play a generation,
summarize, generate, compile, then play the next generation with the table just
built. Run it with no arguments for its usage; in short it takes the game
config, the config for the leave set, and one game count per generation.


HOW LEAVE QUALITY IS MEASURED

Two leave tables are compared by having them play each other. The
english-compare command runs self-play games in which player 0 uses the first
table and player 1 uses the second, everything else identical, and reports
player 0's share of the games:

  cargo run --release --bin leave -- \
    english-compare CSW24.kwg a.klv2 b.klv2 1000000

The last number is how many game pairs to play. Games are run in mirrored
pairs: the same deal is played twice, once with each table in each seat, so the
luck of the draw and the first-move advantage cancel between the two halves and
only the tables' own skill is left to separate them. Passing "-" in place of a
table file means the null table, described next.

Player 0's win share is its fraction of all the games, counting a draw as half
a game to each side. 50 percent is a tie; above 50 means the first table won
more and is the better table in that head-to-head. The share is reported in
percentage points, written "pp": 50.13 means 0.13 pp above a tie.

Because each game turns partly on luck, a small gap can be noise, so
english-compare also reports a confidence: the probability that the leading
table is genuinely ahead rather than ahead by chance. It comes from a
normal-curve model that treats each game as an even bet and measures how many
standard errors the lead sits above an even split. A standard error is the
typical size of the random wobble in the win share; on this model it shrinks
with the square root of the number of games, and each pair is two games. At one
million pairs (two million games) it is about 0.035 pp, and at ten million
pairs about 0.011 pp. A lead of about one standard error reads as roughly 84
percent confidence, about two standard errors as roughly 98 percent, and a lead
lost in the noise reads near 50 percent (a tie); 100 percent is as certain as
this test gets. So a gap under about 0.035 pp at a million pairs is noise no
matter which way its sign happens to fall.

A table played against itself scores 50.00 by symmetry, which is the
calibration check. Setting WOLGES_COMPARE_PORCELAIN to a nonzero value appends
a machine-readable block after the normal output -- one NAME VALUE per line
(each table's share, the win percent, the draws, the confidence, which side
leads, and the game and pair counts) -- so a script reads the first table's
share directly instead of pattern-matching the human-readable line.

New knobs: WOLGES_COMPARE_PORCELAIN.

Every number below is a fresh english-compare run of our own tables against our
own tables.


THE NULL REFERENCE

The simplest possible table gives every leave a value of zero. Call it the null
table (english-compare takes it by passing "-" instead of a file). It never
changes, so every other table can be measured against the same far-away
yardstick and all the results sit on one scale. Any real leave table beats null
by a wide margin -- knowing that keeping ING beats keeping QVX is most of the
battle -- so null loses heavily, winning only about 37.5 percent of its games
against a self-play table (confidence 100), and null against null is 50.00 by
symmetry.


SMOOTHING, OR NOT

The generate step comes in two variants. The plain english-generate smooths the
table: a rack seen only a handful of times has a noisy average, so its value is
pulled toward what similar, better-sampled racks say, steadying the leaves that
self-play rarely deals. english-generate-no-smooth skips that and uses the
observed averages as they stand.

In head-to-head play the two are a tie. A smoothed table against an unsmoothed
one, both built from the same self-play at two million games, lands at about
49.99 for the smoothed side over a few hundred thousand pairs, and at two
million pairs the unsmoothed side leads with only about 57 percent confidence
-- well short of the roughly 98 percent that would mark a real difference. So
smoothing neither clearly helps nor clearly hurts self-play strength; it mainly
keeps the rare leaves from swinging on a few lucky games. Smoothing is the
default genleaves.sh uses; it turns off only when a per-generation min-samples
count is asked for.


FORCING HARD-TO-DRAW RACKS

Self-play rarely deals a rack full of rare tiles, so the leaves that lean on
such racks are built from too few games. To cover them, autoplay can force a
hard-to-draw rack onto a board and value its best play there.
WOLGES_IMPOSSIBLE_OK controls what happens when a forced rack needs a tile the
board has already used up: on (the default) values the rack anyway -- its tiles
forced onto the board, since the move generator plays it whether or not the bag
still holds those tiles -- so the rare rack still gets covered; off records
only what the board could really deal, at the cost of a per-sample possibility
check.

New knobs: WOLGES_IMPOSSIBLE_OK.


WORKER THREADS

Every builder and every compare runs in parallel across cores. WOLGES_THREADS
sets the worker-thread count -- self-play autoplay, the playability scan, and
english-compare so far -- defaulting to the machine's core count. Threads
change only how fast a run goes, never the table it produces.

New knobs: WOLGES_THREADS.


BOARD-SAMPLING LEAVES

The board-sampling method, published by GillesB, manufactures racks instead of
waiting for self-play to deal them. english-gilles plays greedy games and,
every few turns while a game is in its middle, takes a snapshot of the board.
"Middle" means the number of tiles not yet on the board is between a quarter
and three-quarters of the full set -- for the classic English game, between 25
and 75 of the 100 tiles -- never the empty opening board, and never the endgame
once the bag is empty (with an empty bag no tiles are drawn, so the leave table
is not consulted there).

At each snapshot it draws several random groups of tiles -- by default from the
whole starting bag -- keeps the least likely group, meaning the rarest,
hardest-to-draw combination, and then forms every full rack that can be made
from that group, valuing each rack's best play on that board. Drawing from the
whole bag lets a group include rares this board has already used up; such a
rack is then valued with its tiles forced onto the board, since the move
generator plays it whether or not the bag still holds those tiles. (The
WOLGES_IMPOSSIBLE_OK knob introduced above switches the draw source to this
board's leftover pool.) Forming every rack from one chosen group yields a
dense, related batch of racks per board at once, which is what makes it
efficient.

The output is exactly the autoplay summary format -- a totals row, then rack,
equity-sum, count rows -- so a board-sampling run and an autoplay run merge
with each other through english-resummarize and decompose into leaves through
english-generate in the very same way.

The rules of thumb -- when to snapshot, how big a group to draw, how many
groups to try, how far apart to snapshot -- are GillesB's. The group size and
the snapshot window scale with the game's tile count so they fit any variant;
for the classic English game they reduce to his values (snapshot at 25 to 75
tiles left, a group of 13 tiles, 7-tile racks). Each is exposed as a knob, but
the defaults are those published values.

New knobs: WOLGES_GILLES_DRAWS, WOLGES_GILLES_GROUP, WOLGES_GILLES_STRIDE,
WOLGES_POOL_MAX, WOLGES_POOL_MIN.


HOW THE METHODS COMPARE

All three tables are measured with english-compare at one million game pairs,
fresh, our own against our own. Board sampling is ahead:

  board sampling vs the autoplay baseline: english-compare reports 47.8800 for
    the autoplay table (the first table), confidence 100 -- so board sampling
    wins, its lead about 2.1 pp above an even split.

  board sampling vs null: english-compare reports 35.3946 for null, confidence
    100 -- so board sampling wins by about 14.6 pp.

  null vs null: 50.00, the calibration check.

The autoplay baseline likewise beats null by a wide margin: in a direct
head-to-head the null table wins only about 37.5 percent of the pairs against
it (confidence 100).

So at this point board sampling is the strongest table, ahead of the self-play
autoplay baseline, and both are far ahead of null. The autoplay baseline here
is the existing self-play table described above, and the numbers are on that
footing.


COVERING THE RARE RACKS

Plain board sampling never promises that every rack gets studied. A rack built
mostly from one-of-a-kind tiles -- a rack that wants the Q, say -- is hard to
draw, so across a whole run it turns up only a handful of times, or never. Its
leaves then rest on very few samples or none, and english-generate has to guess
their value from the fuller racks it did see rather than measure it directly.
(The plain english-generate does exactly that filling-in, called smoothing; the
english-generate-no-smooth variant leaves an unmeasured leave alone instead.)
The question this raises: if we spent the effort to sample those rare racks
enough to measure them, would the resulting table play any better?

To find out, english-gilles takes one more optional number, a minimum-sample
target, right after the game count:

  cargo run --release --bin leave -- \
    english-gilles CSW24.kwg a.klv2 b.klv2 1000000 [min_samples] [seed]

A min_samples of 0, the default, is exactly the plain board sampling already
described -- byte for byte the same summary. A nonzero value turns on a
remediation phase: the threads first play the requested games as usual, then
keep playing extra games, but on each board they now aim the rack enumeration
at the racks still short of the target count. On a snapshot they take the worst
(least-likely) group, enumerate the still-undersampled racks inside it, widen
the group with a few of the rarest leftover tiles to reach more of them, and
fill any remaining room with random racks so each snapshot still does a steady
amount of work. The threads periodically rebuild the shortfall list and stop
once nothing is left short or the shortfall stops dropping.

Because every rack it scores is assembled from tiles actually left on that
board, it is always a rack that could really occur there. Any racks that still
cannot be reached -- a tail of one-copy tiles that always get played before the
snapshot window opens -- are reported at the end rather than silently dropped.
(One supporting fix rode along here: the exchange enumerator now clears its
working buffer before it starts, since the random fill-in can leave tiles
behind and the enumeration assumes an empty buffer; without the reset the
enumeration would quietly produce almost nothing and wrongly look like full
coverage.)

With a target of 1 the shortfall falls steadily to zero, covering all 3,199,724
racks the standard tile distribution can form. That count is a property of the
100-tile bag -- the standard letter counts plus two blanks -- not of any word
list: a word list decides which racks can score, not which can be drawn. So the
remediation does what it claims: it reaches every rack with measured data.

The rarest racks, though, make it crawl. A tile with a single copy in the bag
is almost always played before the midgame snapshot window opens, so a rack
needing it can only be sampled in the rare game where that tile happens to sit
unplayed that long, and chasing the last few thousand such racks that way
dominates the whole run. WOLGES_GILLES_RESERVE (off by default) attacks that
tail directly: before each remediation game it takes a batch of the
still-uncovered racks, gathers the tiles they need, sets those aside up to a
budget, and deals the game from the rest of the bag. The reserved tiles never
enter play, so they are still unseen when the midgame snapshots happen and the
wanted racks become directly drawable right where the sampling looks -- at the
correct midgame phase, and with nothing impossible ever sampled, since the
held-back tiles really are unseen on that board. The budget,
WOLGES_GILLES_RESERVE_BUDGET, defaults to what the bag can spare and still deal
the opening racks and play into the snapshot window, so it scales with the bag
rather than being a fixed count. It is off by default because holding tiles
back makes the board a little unnatural -- those tiles are absent more often
than chance would have them -- which can nudge the leave values, so it is a
lever to grind the rare tail faster, to be checked with english-compare before
it is trusted.

The verdict, measured our own table against our own with english-compare at one
million game pairs, plain board sampling as the yardstick:

  min-samples remediation vs plain board sampling: english-compare reports
    49.9660 for the remediated table (the first table) -- a lead of about one
    standard error below an even split, which reads as a tie.

  reserve pool vs plain board sampling: english-compare reports 49.9856 for
    the reserved-pool table, well inside the noise -- a tie.

So spending the effort to measure the rare racks, instead of letting
english-generate fill them in, does not make the table play any better: the
fill-in estimate for those hard-to-draw racks was already good enough, because
a rack that is hard to draw is also one the move generator rarely has to value
in real play. Both levers stay optional and off by default; they earn their
keep only when you specifically want the rare tail measured rather than
estimated.

New knobs: WOLGES_GILLES_RESERVE, WOLGES_GILLES_RESERVE_BUDGET.


THE REAL DRAWN RACK

Board sampling builds its racks from the worst group on each board -- the
least-likely tiles -- which is what the method is for, but it has a side
effect. The racks it studies lean toward odd, rare-tile holdings and rarely
toward the common vowel-heavy ones. So the method tends to undervalue
vowel-rich leaves and overvalue rare-tile leaves. That slant in the valuations,
more than any gap in rare-rack coverage, looks like the method's main remaining
weakness -- which suggests a different fix: instead of manufacturing more rare
racks, also study the ordinary racks the player actually held.

WOLGES_GILLES_REAL_RACK turns that on. On each greedy turn the game has already
found the player's best play, so recording the rack that was held that turn,
scored by that best play, costs almost nothing, and it feeds the sampling the
natural mix of racks the worst-group draw skips over. The knob picks when to
record: off (the default) leaves the plain method untouched; all-turns records
every turn, the way autoplay does; in-window records only while the board sits
inside the snapshot window. It records only while the bag still has tiles, so
there is always a real leave to value, and it stores each real rack exactly
like a worst-group rack, so everything decomposes into leaves the same way.

There is a scale mismatch, though: the worst-group draw floods many
manufactured racks per game while the real rack adds only about one per turn,
so at par the real rack is swamped in the totals.
WOLGES_GILLES_REAL_RACK_WEIGHT counts each real-rack sample this many times
(default 1, a no-op), so a large weight lets the natural rack mix dominate -- a
way to test whether real-rack sampling helps the leaves at all.

The verdict, our table against our own at one million game pairs, plain board
sampling as the yardstick:

  real-rack sampling vs plain board sampling: english-compare reports 50.0135
    for the real-rack table (the first table), inside the noise -- a tie.

And pushing the weight high (for example 200) makes the vowel undervaluation
worse, not better. That points the finger at how each rack is measured -- a
single greedy best-play score -- rather than at which racks are chosen:
rebalancing the mix of racks toward the common ones does not cure the slant, so
the slant is baked into the one-play scoring, not into the sampling. Real-rack
sampling stays off by default and the weight stays 1, both changing nothing
unless asked.

New knobs: WOLGES_GILLES_REAL_RACK, WOLGES_GILLES_REAL_RACK_WEIGHT.


COVERING RARE SUBRACKS IN AUTOPLAY

The same rare-coverage question applies to the autoplay baseline, and autoplay
already has a way to chase it: alongside the racks its games naturally deal, it
can force extra samples of the rarely-seen ones. But folding those forced
samples in correctly turns out to matter, and the naive way does real harm.

Recall that english-generate apportions each rack's average score across all
the smaller tile-groups you could keep from it, weighting by how drawable the
extra tiles are. That apportioning is right for a rack the games actually
dealt. It is wrong for a forced sample: a forced rack comes from a lopsided,
unusual board picked precisely to reach a rare holding, so apportioning its
score across all of its leaves would leak that oddness into the common leaves
that share those smaller groups -- the very leaves that are already well
measured. Done that way, forcing more samples makes the common leaves worse,
which defeats the purpose of forcing at all.

The fix keeps the two kinds of samples in two separate files. The normal
summary holds the racks the games really dealt, apportioned across their leaves
exactly as before; when nothing is forced this file is byte for byte what
autoplay wrote before. A second, rare file holds the forced samples, and each
one is credited only to the single leave it was forced for -- never apportioned
anywhere else. The rare file is written only when something was actually
forced.

To make that work, two things that autoplay used to do one full rack at a time
now happen one leave at a time: measuring how many samples each leave has, and
topping up the short ones. Autoplay measures each leave's coverage by breaking
the real racks down the same way english-generate will, adds in the rare
samples gathered so far, and tops up whichever leaves are still short by
completing each with filler tiles drawn from the board's still-unseen pool. The
impossible-rack switch described earlier (WOLGES_IMPOSSIBLE_OK) decides what to
do when a leave cannot occur on the current board. So the prize here is
precisely the undersampled leaves -- the ones the games rarely produce -- not
the mathematically least-likely racks; a common leave that simply happened to
come up little gets topped up just as a genuinely rare one does.

english-generate takes the rare file as one more optional argument after the
leaves file:

  cargo run --release --bin leave -- \
    english-generate summary.csv leaves.csv [rare.csv]

Its rows are already counted per leave, each carrying its own score total and
sample count, so they are added straight into the same running totals
english-generate keeps, skipping the apportioning a full rack goes through.
They only ever name real leaves you keep, never the empty leave that all the
others are measured against, so the empty-leave baseline never moves: the rare
file can only fill in coverage, it cannot tilt the whole table. (The reader
borrows each field in place rather than copying it, so it allocates nothing per
row, matching how the main summary is read.) The genleaves.sh driver carries
the rare file end to end: when autoplay forcing is on it writes the rare file
beside the normal summary, hands it to the english-generate step, and adds it
to the result archive; when forcing is off no rare file is made or passed, so
the plain autoplay and board-sampling paths stay byte-identical to before.

This is a correctness fix rather than a new lever: it is what makes forced
rare-subrack coverage safe to add at all. Whether the added coverage then moves
the table is the same question the remediation above answered -- covering the
rare tail with measured data, rather than an estimate, does not by itself make
a stronger table -- and here too the safe default is to leave forcing off
unless you specifically want that tail measured. The claim that folding forced
samples into the common pile makes the leaves measurably worse is the design
rationale for the two-file split, and it is verifiable from the code:
apportioning lopsided-board samples pollutes the shared common leaves. It is
argued from that mechanism, not from an at-scale english-compare of folding-in
versus the split.


TWO WAYS TO WEIGHT A RACK IN THE DECOMPOSE

The generate step values a leave by averaging the best-play values of all the
fuller racks that contain it. That average has to weight each fuller rack
somehow, and there are two sensible ways to do it -- the same choice applies to
any summary fed to english-generate, whether it came from self-play or from
board sampling.

Recall how a rack reaches the average. Self-play (or board sampling) sees a
full rack some number of times and, each time, records the best-play equity
from it; the summary keeps that rack's running equity-sum and its count of
sightings. Its mean best-play value is that equity-sum divided by that count.
When english-generate splits the rack across the leaves you could keep from it,
it must also weight the rack by how many ways the rest of the rack -- the tiles
beyond the leave -- could be drawn from the bag, the same draw-combination
count the autoplay baseline used (drawing without replacement). For a rack R
and a kept leave S that count is written ways(R, S): the ways to draw the tiles
of R that are not in S. So each leave ends up an average over the racks that
contain it, and the question is only what each rack's share of that average is.

The way described so far, call it per-occurrence, folds the sighting count
straight into the weight: a rack contributes its whole equity-sum, and its
whole count, each scaled by ways(R, S). Written out, a leave comes out as the
sum over its racks of (equity-sum times ways(R, S)) divided by the sum of
(count times ways(R, S)). Because a rack's equity-sum is already its mean times
its count, this makes each rack pull on the average in proportion to how often
it was drawn as well as to its draw combinations.

The trouble is that a rack already appears in the summary as many times as it
was drawn -- that is what its count records. Weighting it a second time by that
same count counts the draw frequency twice. A rack that comes up often then
leans harder than its own average score warrants on the short, common leaves it
shares with many other racks, because those shared leaves collect its inflated
weight over and over.

The other way, call it per-rack, weights each distinct rack by its mean alone,
scaled only by ways(R, S), and never by how many times it was sampled. Written
out, a leave comes out as the sum over its racks of (mean times ways(R, S))
divided by the sum of ways(R, S). Each distinct rack now counts exactly once,
at its true average, so how often it happened to be drawn no longer inflates
its pull on the leaves it shares.

Neither way changes the fact that the table still stores a value per whole
leave, not one number per tile -- leaves remain non-additive either way. The
two ways only differ in how much each rack is allowed to sway the leaves it
feeds into.

WOLGES_GENERATE_PER_RACK chooses between them. It defaults off, which is the
per-occurrence weighting above and reproduces the earlier leaves byte for byte.
Set it on for the per-rack weighting. With it on the leaves come out visibly
different and sensibly shaped in the runs tried; whether that plays stronger is
not something we can call here, only that per-rack is the more defensible of
the two on the double-counting argument.

New knobs: WOLGES_GENERATE_PER_RACK.


THE EXACT PER-BOARD CENSUS

Board sampling and the autoplay baseline both manufacture or observe racks and
then average what those racks happened to be worth. A third method, called the
census, takes the opposite approach: on a single board it goes through every
possible holding exactly and works out what each leave is worth, with no racks
sampled at all. english-census does this on one board, then repeats over many
fresh boards and averages, and writes the result as a leave table:

  cargo run --release --bin leave -- english-census CSW24.kwg a.klv2 b.klv2 500

The two leave files are the tables the two players use while a game is played
out to reach a board worth studying; the last number is how many boards to
study. As with the other methods, starting from the null table (pass "-") the
first pass values plays by their board score alone, and feeding the finished
table back in as the input to the next pass refines it over generations.

The catalog the census hangs off is every subrack -- every group of tiles you
could be holding, from nothing up to a full rack, where a tile may repeat (two
E's is a different holding from one E). Each subrack is given a number, and the
number can be turned back into the subrack, both by a direct formula with no
stored table: the subracks are ordered first by how many tiles they hold and
then in a fixed order by their letter counts, and a single pass over the tile
kinds converts either way. For the classic English game -- twenty-seven tile
kinds counting the blank, a seven-tile rack -- there are 5,379,616 subracks.
The catalog hardcodes nothing about English: the number of tile kinds and the
rack size are both parameters, so the census works for any game variant.


HOW THE CENSUS VALUES A LEAVE

On one board the census works in three steps.

First it builds a play-value sheet: for every group of tiles you could play,
the most points that playing exactly those tiles can score on this board. It
gets the sheet from one move generation over the tiles still unseen -- every
tile not yet on the board, opponent racks included, since a sampled rack is a
hypothetical draw from everything not yet placed. Of all the plays the search
finds for one played group, only the best score is kept in the sheet.

Second, from the sheet it works out the best any full rack can do. The best a
rack can do is the best over every way to divide it into tiles you play and
tiles you keep: the play's score from the sheet, plus the value of the keep
from the leave table currently in hand. This is computed for every full rack in
the catalog at once. A slow, obviously-correct reference -- literally try every
play-and-keep split -- pins down what the answer must be, and the fast version
that fills the whole catalog is checked against that reference in the tests, so
the fast path is proven right before it is trusted.

Third, it values each leave. You keep some tiles; the bag then draws the rest
of your rack back up to a full rack. For every way that draw could come out,
look up the best that completed rack can do, and average those -- weighting
each possible draw by how many ways it can actually come out of the unseen
tiles, so likely draws count more than unlikely ones (drawing without
replacement: the kept tiles are themselves already gone from the pool, and the
completion is drawn from what remains). That weighted average is the leave's
value: the worth of walking into a turn holding exactly those tiles, given
everything still unseen. A full-length leave -- the full rack kept, that is, a
pass -- draws nothing and takes its own best-rack value straight through. A
leave the board's unseen tiles cannot complete at all is left unvalued on that
board.

The result is exactly the worth of holding that leave, measured for every leave
on the board rather than estimated from the racks that happened to come up.
Each board contributes a running total and count per leave; after all the
boards, every leave's average is taken, the whole table is shifted so the empty
leave is worth zero (its value is the average best full-rack equity -- the
natural baseline), and a (leave, value) row is written per leave. Rare
holdings, which one board may not be able to complete, get covered by piling up
boards: more boards mean less noise and more of the uncommon board situations
reached.

The table is written without the full-length leaves by default. Keeping a full
rack (a pass) is almost never the best move mid-game, and the empty-bag endgame
is scored with its own penalty rather than from the leave table, so dropping
those rows gives a smaller, play-identical file; WOLGES_FULL=1 keeps them.

New knobs: WOLGES_FULL.


EXCHANGING, AND WHY GOOD LEAVES FAN OUT

Weighing only "play a word" against "pass and keep the whole rack" would
under-rate good leaves. A particular good leave would get credit only on the
rare board where some word happens to play away exactly the other tiles; the
rest of the time the rack would effectively throw that leave away, and good
leaves' values would collapse toward the average.

But before the endgame, with tiles still in the bag, you can always exchange
the tiles you do not want: an exchange is always allowed, scores nothing, and
keeps whatever you choose. So disposing of any played group is worth at least
zero. The census bakes that floor into the play-value sheet: every entry starts
at zero, and a word only ever raises it, so a group no play reaches, or that
would only score below zero, sits at zero. Reading the sheet then already
includes the option of exchanging that group for nothing and keeping the rest.
This lets any leave be reached by exchanging toward it, which is exactly its
keep-this-leave value, so good leaves fan back out instead of collapsing to the
average. (Starting at zero and keeping the best also does the right thing in
variants where a word can score below zero, which the ordinary game never
does.) On the first pass there are no leaves to keep toward yet, so exchanging
is worth the same zero as a pass and the output is unchanged; the fanning-out
appears only once there are real leaves in hand.


WHAT THE CENSUS COSTS TO RUN

The census's whole-catalog work is heavy, and getting it to run at all, then at
volume, is most of what these steps are about.

The play-value sheet is a single move generation over the entire unseen pool,
and the number of plays that generation finds grows far faster than the pool
does: an unseen pool of about twenty-seven tiles yields a couple of million
plays and builds quickly, while a pool of the mid-forties yields billions and
is out of reach. Two things made even the tractable boards run. The plays are
never stored -- each play's score is written into the sheet as it is found and
the play itself is dropped -- so the memory used no longer depends on how many
plays there are, and open boards can no longer run the machine out of memory.
And exchange moves are switched off for the sheet's generation: profiling the
slow midgame showed the time was going not into the word search but into the
move generator listing exchanges, which means enumerating every subset of the
pool to keep -- an astronomical number over forty-odd tiles. The sheet only
needs word plays, since exchanging is already handled by the disposal floor, so
turning exchange listing off made the midgame reachable with no new code.

Beyond that, the hot inner work was sped up without changing what it computes:
the census reuses the project's shared table of "how many ways to choose"
counts instead of its own; the big best-rack value table is allocated once and
handed to every board rather than rebuilt each time (around twenty-one
megabytes for English); the catalog numbering of a rack is carried along as the
search descends over its tiles instead of recomputed at every play-and-keep
split (measured at roughly eight times faster in profiling); and the array
bounds-checks on lookups that are provably in range are dropped in release
builds. Finally, the boards are valued in parallel across cores -- each board
is independent, builds its own sheet, and contributes its per-leave totals
under a brief lock -- because a trustworthy table needs hundreds of boards and
doing them one at a time was impractical. The result does not depend on the
thread count: each board seeds its own random generator from the run's seed and
the board's own slot number, so the exact set of boards is fixed by the seed
and the board count alone, and a two-thread run and a four-thread run of the
same seed produce identical output.

Because the sheet is enumerative, the census studies only late-midgame boards
by default -- boards full enough that the unseen pool is small, but with the
bag not yet empty (once the bag is empty no tiles are drawn and the leave table
is not consulted). Covering wide-open early boards the same exact way would
need a play-value sheet that does not enumerate every play, which does not
exist here yet.


HOW THE CENSUS COMPARES

The census's clear, immediate win is runtime, not a proven jump in play
strength. It computes the exact one-move worth of every leave on a board and,
with the passes above, does so fast enough to run across hundreds of boards on
an ordinary many-core machine -- where board sampling and the autoplay baseline
have to average over many manufactured or observed racks to get the same
coverage. Like every real leave table, it beats the null table by a wide
margin. Whether its exact per-board values play stronger than board sampling or
the autoplay baseline, and by how much, is not something a fresh head-to-head
settles at this point; the honest claim is the runtime one.

New knobs: WOLGES_CENSUS_BLANK_CAP, WOLGES_CENSUS_VERIFY.


TWO WAYS TO ATTRIBUTE A BOARD'S VALUE: ENTERING VS FULL-RACK

There are two honest ways to turn a board's play values into leave values, and
the census can do either. They are selected by a knob, WOLGES_APPORTION.
(Autoplay reads the same knob for a related choice: whether to record the full
rack it drew or only the leave carried into the turn.)

Entering attribution values a leave by the worth of walking into a turn holding
exactly that leave: average the best play of every full rack you could complete
that leave to, weighted by the ways(R, S) draw count from before. This credits
only the leave carried into the turn -- and it is exactly the value the census
has been computing all along.

Full-rack apportionment is the exhaustive analog of what the sampled board
method already does. Take every full rack the board could deal, find the best
it can do, weight it by how likely that rack is to be drawn, and hand a share
of that value to every subrack the rack contains -- so a leave's value is the
total, over every full rack that contains it, of that rack's weighted value.
Each subrack keeps a running numerator and denominator, and the leave is the
numerator over the denominator. The census does this over every rack on the
board exactly, not by sampling. It is worth trying because it is the complete
attribution: every subrack of every rack is credited, including the heavy tiles
a player rarely chooses to play but that still shape a rack's future, rather
than only the leave that happened to be carried in.

Full-rack apportionment is the new alternative here, opt-in with
WOLGES_APPORTION=full-rack; a plain census run still gives the entering value.
Having both lets the two be compared head to head on identical boards. The
verdict, measured on CSW24 in our own self-play, is that they come out
essentially even: the entering table scored 50.0791 percent of games at one
million game pairs (about 0.08 pp above an even split) and 50.0296 at ten
million pairs (about 0.03 pp), a real but negligible edge for entering. So the
choice between them is not about play strength.

New knobs: WOLGES_APPORTION.


CHOOSING BOARDS ACROSS THE GAME

A leave is worth different amounts at different stages of the game, so the
boards the census studies should span a range of game stages, not sit at one
moment. The census picks boards within a window of how full the board is --
counted, as the board sampler counts, in tiles not yet on the board (the unseen
pool). At first each board was recorded the instant it first dropped into that
window, which meant every studied board sat right at the window's open edge,
all bunched at one point in the game. Now each fresh game aims at a fill level
chosen from across the whole window and records the board when it reaches that
level, so the studied boards range across the window's fill levels. A board
only ever sampled at one fill level gives biased values; sampling across the
window removes that bias, the same way sampling whole games already covers
every phase.


KEEP THE WINDOW OUT OF THE ENDGAME

The census values a leave by averaging over the tiles you might draw next, and
its exchange fallback assumes there are tiles to swap for. Once the bag is
empty there are neither, and the move generator does not even consult the leave
table in the endgame -- it scores that phase a different way. So studying an
empty-bag board would invent draw value out of nothing and fold it into leaves
that only ever get used earlier. The guard keeps the window off the endgame.

The quantity that really decides the endgame is the unseen pool. The bag is the
unseen pool minus the tiles sitting in the players' racks, so a board's leaves
matter only while the pool is larger than what the racks hold. For the classic
English game two full seven-tile racks hold fourteen tiles, so the pool window
is floored at fifteen -- one more than fourteen. (Stated the other way, that is
a board no fuller than eighty-five of a hundred tiles down; at eighty-six the
bag is empty.) These figures come from the game's own tile count and rack size,
not hardcoded, so the guard holds for any variant. A window setting that would
push past the floor is raised back to it with a warning rather than quietly
producing endgame-polluted leaves; the normal window is well inside the floor,
so a usual run is unchanged.

One subtlety: a single move can lay down several tiles at once, so a game
played toward a target fill can overshoot it by up to a rackful. Capping the
target is therefore not enough -- the move that first crosses a high target
could land past the window's edge and tip into an empty bag. So the census
checks the board that actually resulted, not the target it aimed at: it keeps
the board only if its fill is still inside the window, and otherwise discards
that game and tries again for the same target. This closes a leak by which a
few percent of the supposedly clean boards were still endgame.


EVEN COVERAGE OF THE FILL LEVELS

With only a few hundred boards scattered over the window's fill levels (fewer
per level when the window is opened wide), picking each board's target fill at
random lands unevenly -- some levels get none, some several -- so the fill
levels are covered lumpily. Instead the census cycles through the fill levels
in order: board number b aims at the level b steps into the window, wrapping
around. Every level then gets the same number of boards, so the leaves average
over an even mix of fill levels -- the same average as random targeting, but
less noise. Each worker still seeds its own games, so the boards stay
independent and the run stays reproducible.

WOLGES_CENSUS_BUCKETS coarsens that cycle to a fixed number of evenly spaced
levels instead of every single one -- for example eleven levels, roughly ten
percent of the window apart. Coarser steps collect more boards per level, which
is less noisy when the board count is low, and because the spacing is a
fraction of the window it picks out the same stages of the game whatever the
board size, so a normal English board and a larger variant are sampled at
matching stages. It changes only how the sampling is spaced, not the leaves it
settles on; left at its default (every fill level) the run is byte-identical.


ONE REAL GAME PER WORKER (OPTIONAL)

The default sampler plays a fresh game to one chosen fill, values that single
board, and starts over -- independent draws, evenly spaced across the window.
That even spacing does not match how much of a real game is actually spent at
each fill. WOLGES_CENSUS_PER_GAME turns on another way: each worker
greedy-plays one real game and values every board along it whose fill falls in
the window -- consecutive positions from the same game -- stopping once the
board fills past the window rather than playing the game out. The boards then
follow the mix a real game actually visits, closer to what our own self-play
sees, and each position is reused rather than replayed from scratch, so it is
cheaper too. In this mode the board count counts games, and a game yields
however many in-window boards it happens to pass through; the fill jumps
several tiles per move, so a narrow window catches few positions -- open the
window wide.

Left as it is, this mode follows how often a game naturally sits at each pool
size, so common fill levels pile up and rare ones stay thin. It can also aim
for even coverage while still reusing one game's positions: a running tally,
shared across workers, counts how many samples each pool size has so far, and
each game samples only the positions that land on the sizes currently furthest
behind, so the thin buckets catch up. It stops a game early once the board has
filled past the lowest size still behind -- the pool only shrinks as tiles go
down, so no later position can help. Because that shared tally is updated
without locking, exactly which positions get sampled depends on how the workers
interleave, so this even-coverage per-game path is not bit-for-bit repeatable;
the leaves still settle to the same answer regardless. The plain
reset-and-cycle mode remains the reproducible one.


UPDATING THE LEAVES AS THE RUN GOES

Normally the census values a whole run of boards and only then produces the
leaves; to improve them you run the whole thing again with those leaves fed
back in, until they reproduce themselves (the leaves that come out match the
leaves that went in). WOLGES_CENSUS_BATCH adds a way to improve them during a
single run. It sets how many boards form a batch (the default is all of them --
one batch, exactly the plain behavior). With a smaller batch, the workers value
a batch using the current leaves, and then, at a gathering point, the leaves
are nudged part of the way toward what that batch found before the next batch
starts. WOLGES_CENSUS_ALPHA is how far -- half by default, so the leaves move
halfway toward each batch's findings. Because every batch after the first
values its boards with already-improved leaves, a run settles on the same final
leaves in far fewer boards than re-running whole passes does. With fixed batch
boundaries the update combines the same way whichever worker applies it, so
this stays reproducible in the reset-and-cycle mode. Left at the default it is
byte-identical.

New knobs: WOLGES_CENSUS_ALPHA, WOLGES_CENSUS_BATCH, WOLGES_CENSUS_BUCKETS,
WOLGES_CENSUS_PER_GAME.


THE BLANK MODEL: SPELL EACH WORD ONCE

The census's first step builds a play-value sheet: for each set of played
tiles, the best score, from one move-generator pass over the unseen pool. A
blank tile can be played as any letter, so in the plain build it follows every
word path the board allows -- not an arbitrary twenty-six-letter fan-out, but
every real edge in the word graph. That means a word playable with a blank is
found once for each letter the blank stands as, and again with a real tile when
the pool holds one. When the pool holds several blanks, the same word is
re-found once for every combination of which of its tiles are blanks, and that
cost grows with the number of blanks in the pool -- the dominant cost of the
sheet build on blank-rich tile sets.

The faster build spells each word exactly once. The generator descends
real-before-blank: it uses a blank for a letter only when no real copy of that
letter is left (real preferred), so each feasible word comes out once. Then the
census reconstructs every blank spelling of that word by arithmetic, with no
further move generation. This works because blanking a placed tile only removes
that tile's own face value -- the blank stays in place, so every word and
letter multiplier and the bingo bonus are untouched. The score drops from
turning tiles into blanks are therefore independent and simply add up: for any
choice of which placed tiles are blank, the score is the all-real score minus
the face-value drops at those positions. For a given number of blanks spent on
one letter, the cheapest positions (smallest drops) are blanked first. The
sheet comes out bit-for-bit the same either way; only the build is faster, most
so on blank-rich tile sets.


FILLING RACK VALUES BY WORD

To value a board the census needs, for every full rack, the best single play
that rack can make. The straightforward way searches each rack's ways to split
into played tiles and kept tiles. On a full bag there are millions of racks, so
that search dominates. Since most splits play a non-word and are worthless,
only the real-word plays matter, so the census can turn the search around: for
each playable word on the board, scatter its score forward onto every rack that
could play it, adding the value of whatever that rack would keep, then read
each rack's best straight off. This touches only the word plays instead of
every split and gives bit-for-bit the same values. It helps most on the
big-pool boards that dominate the wall clock, and can cost a little on the
smallest pools and on the very largest alphabets (where the table of possible
racks is several times bigger, so the extra scattered writes outweigh the
saving). So it is on by default only where it pays: WOLGES_CENSUS_SCATTER takes
off, on, or auto, and auto (the default) turns it on for the common alphabets
and the big pools and off elsewhere.

The rest of the sheet-and-valuation speedups are byte-identical reshuffles: the
two full-rack passes are fused into one (each rack visited once, dropping a
large per-worker value table), only the racks the board can actually deal are
built (a big win late in the game, when most racks are undrawable), and on a
full bag the per-rack hand-out of value is replaced by a fixed-cost set of
passes over the table (WOLGES_CENSUS_ZETA_POOL sets the unseen-pool size at
which the build switches to that path, default thirty-six for English). None of
these change the leaves; they are why the census can be both exact and fast,
which is its selling point over sampling.

New knobs: WOLGES_CENSUS_SCATTER, WOLGES_CENSUS_ZETA_POOL.


CREDITING WHAT THE OPPONENT CANNOT DRAW

Every leave value so far measures only what a leave does for the holder's own
next turn: the best play it makes possible once the rest of the rack is drawn.
But the tiles a player keeps are also tiles the opponent cannot draw. Keeping
the Q, the Z, or a fistful of blanks starves the other side's next rack a
little, so their best reply comes out slightly worse. That harm -- the value of
what your kept tiles deny the opponent -- is nowhere in the leave table. The
experiments here try to add it, and none of them pays off; they are kept as
recorded dead-ends.

All of them share one piece of per-board work. On a sampled board, the census
machinery already values every full rack that could be drawn from the pool of
tiles not yet seen. Reusing that, these terms ask a second question about the
opponent: how much worse is the opponent's expected best play once some of the
unseen tiles are locked up in your hand? Because the same valuation answers
both questions, the opponent term is just an extra fold on top of a board the
sampler already studied. Each term is a knob whose value is the weight -- a
multiplier -- given to the opponent piece; every one defaults to zero (off),
and off leaves the leave tables byte for byte identical to the plain method.


THE PER-LETTER OPPONENT TERM (one tile at a time)

The cheap version measures the denial one letter at a time. On a sampled board,
take the opponent's expected best play over all the racks they could draw from
the unseen pool. Now remove one tile of a given letter from that pool and take
the same expectation again: it drops a little, because a slightly worse set of
racks is now drawable. That drop is what a single tile of that letter denies
the opponent. Doing this for every letter gives a per-letter drop, and
averaging those over all the sampled boards gives one denial figure per letter.

There are two places to fold that per-letter drop in, and the code exposes
both:

  WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_LEAVE adds it straight into the finished table. The sampler
  writes the board-averaged per-letter drops to a companion file next to the
  summary, and the decompose step adds the weight times the sum of a leave's
  own per-letter drops to that leave's value.

  WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_RACK adds it earlier, to each drawn rack's recorded value
  before the summary is written, so it rides through the same summarize-and-
  decompose path as every other recorded value with no companion file.

Both use the same per-letter drops, and both are linear: each kept tile's
denial is counted on its own and the counts are summed. That is the built-in
weakness. Leave values are not additive -- the worth of keeping Q and U
together is not the worth of Q plus the worth of U -- so adding up each tile's
denial separately can only estimate the true joint effect of holding several
tiles at once. Still, it is the obvious first cut and it costs almost nothing
on top of the census, so it is worth measuring.

Verdict. Running the census with each term turned on against the census with it
off, one million game pairs, our tables against our own tables:

  WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_LEAVE: the term-on table scores 49.9691, confidence 80.9 --
    a hair below an even split, meaning the denial credit made the table very
    slightly worse, but the lead is under one standard error (the roughly 0.035
    pp noise floor at a million pairs), so it is really no change either way,
    if anything a tiny loss.

  WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_RACK: the term-on table scores 49.9931, confidence 57.7 -- a
    tie, well inside the noise.

Neither per-letter term earns its place; both stay off by default.


THE EXACT JOINT OPPONENT TERM

Because the per-letter estimate double-counts when several kept tiles all help
the same opponent play, the next step computes the opponent effect exactly,
with no per-tile shortcut. For each full rack the holder might draw, it works
out the opponent's expected best play from the pool that whole rack leaves
behind -- the average of the opponent's best play over every full rack they
could draw from what is left -- using the very best-play values the census
already has. That is the honest joint quantity the per-letter term was
approximating.

The exact term then subtracts a second piece: what the holder's own next turn
recovers from that same leftover pool. WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_EXACT folds the weight
times this joint correction into each drawn rack's value.

Exactness is not free. The opponent's expectation is an average over every
drawable full rack, computed once for every full rack the holder might draw, so
the cost grows with the square of the number of drawable racks. To keep that
bounded the term only runs on boards whose unseen pool is small:
WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_EXACT_POOL_MAX (default 32 tiles) is the ceiling, and boards
with a larger pool skip the term.

Verdict. Census with WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_EXACT on against census with it off, one
million pairs, our-vs-our: 50.0014, confidence 51.5 -- a dead tie. Doing the
opponent term exactly rather than one tile at a time changes nothing
measurable; it too stays off.

New knobs: WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_EXACT, WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_EXACT_POOL_MAX,
WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_LEAVE, WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_RACK.


DIALING BACK THE RECOVERY PIECE

The joint correction has two halves: what the opponent still expects from the
leftover pool, minus what the holder's own next turn recovers from it. That
second half can over-credit. The census leave value is already a fixed point
that sums the holder's own future turns -- the leaves that reproduce themselves
when fed back in -- so subtracting the holder's recovery again partly counts
the same future twice. WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_EXACT_ME2 (default 1.0) scales just
that recovery half: 1.0 keeps the full correction exactly as above, 0.0 drops
the recovery half and counts only the opponent's expectation (the opponent-only
denial, which the fixed point does not already contain), and values in between
temper it.

At the default 1.0 this is the same dead-tie result as WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_EXACT
above. The opponent-only setting (0.0) is a distinct variant, and it does not
help: in a fresh head-to-head the full correction (1.0) beats it 50.13 to 49.87
(confidence 100), so dropping the holder's-recovery half is a small negative,
not a win. The knob stays at 1.0.

New knobs: WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_EXACT_ME2.


COVERING RARE-TILE LEAVES BY HOLDING TILES BACK

A separate coverage experiment, kept in the same recorded-dead-end spirit. The
census can only value a leave on boards where all of that leave's tiles are
still unseen. The single-copy tiles -- the Q, Z, J -- are usually played before
the sampling window opens, so racks that need them are rarely drawable and
their leaves get little or no coverage: on a small board sample a Q-rack's
leave can go unmeasured entirely.

WOLGES_CENSUS_WITHHOLD = B (default 0, off) holds the B rarest tiles out of the
bag for the whole game, so they stay unseen and turn up in the boards the
census studies, and the racks that need them finally get covered. It is the
same reserved-tile idea the board sampler already uses. It is off by default
because it is a quality trade, not a free win: a board that withholds the Q
never places the Q, which shifts the mix of boards being studied away from real
play.

WOLGES_CENSUS_WITHHOLD_FRAC = f, a fraction in (0, 1] (default 1.0, every
board), softens that shift. Below 1.0 only every (1/f)-th board is a withhold
board and the rest are dealt naturally, and the withhold boards are picked
spaced evenly across the game's fill levels rather than bunched in one, so the
common leaves keep an honest board mix while the rare tail still gets some
coverage. At the default 1.0 every board withholds, which is the plain behavior
above.

Verdict. Census with the withhold on against census with it off, one million
pairs, our-vs-our: 50.0436, confidence 89.1. That is a hair above an even
split, but the gap is barely over the 0.035 pp noise floor and the confidence
sits below the two-standard-error (about 98 percent) bar, so it reads as
roughly a tie rather than a real gain. The extra rare-tail coverage does not
clearly pay for the shifted board mix. Both withhold knobs stay off by default.

New knobs: WOLGES_CENSUS_WITHHOLD, WOLGES_CENSUS_WITHHOLD_FRAC,
WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_LEAVE_MARGINAL.


CHOOSING THE DEFAULT ATTRIBUTION

Since the two attributions come out even on CSW24 -- entering held a negligible
edge at ten million game pairs (50.0296, about 0.03 pp) -- the choice is
settled on design grounds, not on play strength. Full-rack is the fuller, more
natural attribution: it credits every subrack the census already computes, in
one inline pass over the board, and it is what every run worth shipping
selected by hand. The old default was entering, so a plain census run silently
produced the narrower leaves, an easy mistake to walk into. The default is
flipped: a plain run now gives full-rack, and entering becomes opt-in with
WOLGES_APPORTION=entering. A plain run is byte-identical to an explicit
WOLGES_APPORTION=full-rack run.


VALUING LEAVES BY WHOLE GAMES

Every method so far values a leave by looking one move ahead: given a board and
a rack, take the best play available this turn and credit its equity to the
leave that play would keep. The census does this exactly, averaging over the
racks a leave could complete to. A whole-game rollout asks a different question
-- can a leave be worth more, or less, than any single move can show, because
of tiles you keep that only pay off two or three turns later? To find out, it
stops looking one move ahead and plays entire games to the finish.

The english-rollout subcommand plays many complete self-play games, both
players choosing their plays with the same leave table (the table is a
parameter; the null table by default). At each turn it records the mover's full
rack. When a game ends it takes the final score difference -- the margin,
positive for the winner -- and credits it to every rack held during that game,
from the point of view of whoever held it. Each rack's credit is weighted by
how many ways the bag could have dealt that rack (the same draw-combination
weight the census uses), and is then apportioned down to all of that rack's
subracks. A leave's value is the weighted average of the game margins of every
rack that contained it, centered so the empty leave is worth zero. This is a
fourth way to build a leave table, run separately from the census.

What it buys is reach: a one-move look is blind to a leave whose payoff is two
turns out, but a finished game has already collected that payoff. The danger is
the opposite of reach -- the final margin is decided mostly by later draws and
by what the opponent does, and only faintly by any one leave you held early, so
it is a very noisy signal for that leave.

The danger won. The plain whole-game form -- credit each leave with the raw
game margin -- is a clear negative: the leaves it produced played worse than
keeping no leave values at all. The reason is exactly the noise. A common leave
is held in enough games that its margins average out, but a rare multi-tile
leave is held in only a handful, so its average margin is wild, and a wild
leave value swings the move generator into bad plays. The census never has this
problem because it values every leave exactly rather than by sampling.

Three more elaborate forms each try to tame that noise, and each still fails in
a way that teaches why.

  Census-fallback. For each leave, trust the rollout only as far as it was well
  sampled and otherwise keep the census's exact value: blend them as
  census-value plus trust times (rollout-value minus census-value), where trust
  rises from zero toward one as the sample count grows (WOLGES_ROLLOUT_SHRINK
  sets how many samples are needed before the rollout is trusted much; feed the
  census leaves in as both the players' table and the fallback). Pulling a
  noisy estimate toward a trusted value in proportion to how well it is
  measured is a standard statistical technique called shrinkage, which the knob
  is named for. This too is a negative: every setting plays strictly worse than
  the census, and the only setting that matches the census is the one that
  falls back to it completely. So the trouble is not merely noise that more
  games would shrink -- the whole-game margin is, on average, a worse target
  than the census's exact one-move value.

  Subtract-what-you-knew. Much of the margin's wobble comes from something
  known before the tiles are drawn -- above all, how strong your own play this
  turn was. So credit each leave with the margin minus the census's one-move
  value of that turn's rack, then add the census value back at the end
  (WOLGES_ROLLOUT_CV turns this on). The intent is to cancel the part of the
  wobble you could already predict and keep only the multi-turn remainder.
  Subtracting a quantity cancels wobble only when that quantity rises and falls
  together with what you are measuring, and one turn's one-move value barely
  tracks a whole game's margin -- which is driven by the opponent and by future
  draws the one-move value cannot see. So the subtraction adds scatter instead
  of removing it: another negative.

  Future-only. The plain whole-game form is unfair in a second way: it credits
  a leave with the entire game margin, including plays made before that leave
  was ever held. The future-only form credits a leave only with what happens
  from the turn it is held onward, and adds a dial between two honest extremes
  -- at one end use the real future outcome in full, at the other trust the
  census's one-move value of the very next position after a single step
  (WOLGES_ROLLOUT_LAMBDA picks the point on the dial). At the use-the-future
  end the rare leaves are still too noisy and wreck play; as the dial leans on
  the census it draws closer to the census but never reaches it, let alone
  beats it. This is the decisive negative, and it pins down the cause: the
  whole-game outcome is on average a worse target than the census's exact
  one-move value -- a systematic error, not just random wobble -- and leaning
  on a trusted value can shrink the wobble but cannot remove a systematic
  error.

So the whole-game rollout is negative four ways -- the raw margin, the census
fallback, the subtract-what-you-knew correction, and the future-only dial. Each
one can recover the census by leaning on it, none can beat it. The census's
exact one-move value is kept as the target, and the rollout is left as a
recorded negative that the knobs above still reproduce. A fresh head-to-head is
decisive: the census's leaves beat the whole-game rollout table 97.7 to 2.3
(confidence 100), the rollout that far behind because one generation of
whole-game outcomes is far noisier per leave than the census's exact one-move
value.

New knobs: WOLGES_ROLLOUT_CV, WOLGES_ROLLOUT_LAMBDA, WOLGES_ROLLOUT_SHRINK.


FORCING FULL RARE RACKS

Self-play almost never deals a rack full of rare tiles, so the leaves that
depend on such racks are built from too few games. Autoplay already patches
this by forcing: deliberately building and playing the cases that self-play
starves, so their leaves rest on real plays rather than on nothing. Until now
it forced at the level of undersampled subracks -- the shorter kept-tile
combinations -- and kept them in a side list, apart from the main rack tally.
It had to: under the per-occurrence decompose, dropping a full rare rack into
the main tally would over-count every common subrack that rack happens to
contain.

Full-rack forcing adds the other option -- force undersampled full racks in
their entirety and record them in the main rack tally, exactly like a naturally
drawn rack. Switched on (WOLGES_AUTOPLAY_FULL_RACK_FORCING, off by default),
the remediation step walks the possible full racks, looks each up in the rack
tally, and targets any seen fewer than the min-samples count. A rack that wants
more copies of a tile than the whole bag holds is skipped -- it can never be
completed, so forcing it would be wasted work. Paired with the
WOLGES_IMPOSSIBLE_OK knob turned on, it will also force racks that this board
cannot currently deal, building them with their tiles forced onto the board. A
forced rack is built tile for tile and recorded keyed by the full rack, count
one. Switched off, the old subrack-targeted path is byte-for-byte unchanged.

This is only sound alongside the per-rack decompose (the -generate weighting
that counts each distinct rack once, weighted by the ways the bag could
complete it, rather than once per occurrence). That weighting is what keeps a
force-covered rack from inflating the common subracks it shares, which is the
very over-counting the side-list subrack path was invented to avoid.

Measured at volume, full-rack forcing was worth turning on for the autoplay
recipe by default. A bare autoplay run now forces each undersampled full rack,
places racks board-tolerantly (it exports the full-rack-forcing and
impossible-ok knobs), and covers every globally-possible rack at least once by
defaulting each generation's min-samples to one. A sound forced run still
passes WOLGES_GENERATE_PER_RACK=1 explicitly, since the per-rack decompose it
leans on is opt-in. Passing --no-forcing reverts to plain natural-rack
sampling; --gilles keeps its own board sampler and is never forced.

On the per-rack decompose footing (each distinct rack weighted once, not once
per occurrence), the forced autoplay table roughly ties board sampling.
english-compare reports 50.0218 for the forced autoplay table against board
sampling, confidence 73.1. That lead is about 0.02 pp above an even split,
smaller than one standard error at a million pairs (about 0.035 pp), so it is a
marginal positive that sits inside the noise -- consistently on the right side
across the run, but not something this test can call apart from a tie. Against
the census the same table reads 49.9774, confidence 73.9 -- again a tie. So
forcing is a small, sub-noise improvement in coverage, not a step change; it is
kept on because a leave built on a real forced play is sounder than one left
starved, and it costs nothing when the racks it targets are the ones self-play
would have missed.

New knobs: WOLGES_AUTOPLAY_FULL_RACK_FORCING.


THE PER-RACK DECOMPOSE BECOMES THE DEFAULT

Recall the two ways english-generate can weight each rack when it turns a
summary of sampled full racks into a per-leave table: per-occurrence folds in
each rack's sampled count, while per-rack uses each distinct rack's average
once, weighted only by ways(R, S), the ways to draw its missing tiles.
Per-occurrence counts the draw frequency twice -- a rack already appears in the
summary about as often as the bag deals it, so weighting that sample again by
its count squares the effect -- and it is exactly what let a force-covered rare
rack pull hard on every short leave it shares with common racks. Per-rack has
neither problem, because a rack's average enters once no matter how it got into
the summary. It is the correct decompose, so it is now the default: a bare
english-generate does the right thing with no environment variable set.

Measured on identical samples -- the same summary decomposed both ways, so
nothing but the weighting differs -- the per-rack table beats the
per-occurrence table. english-compare reports 52.0648 for the per-rack table,
confidence 100: per-rack wins by about 2.06 pp. That is a large, certain gap,
and it settles a footing question left open earlier. The
board-sampling-versus-autoplay comparison reported near the top of this file --
board sampling ahead by about 2.1 pp -- was run on per-occurrence tables (the
47.88 footing); much of that apparent gap between where the racks came from was
the double-counting in the decompose, not a real difference in method. Under
the per-rack default the self-play, board-sampling, and per-board census tables
land much closer together. As with the earlier switch that made full-rack
apportionment the census default, the safe and correct behavior should not need
a flag; set WOLGES_GENERATE_PER_RACK=0 to opt back to per-occurrence, kept only
for reproducing the older tables.


A GENERATION-AWARE, CONFIG-DERIVED CENSUS

Three changes make the census safe to run across several generations and across
tile-sets other than the classic English game, without touching the leaves it
produces.

A multi-generation run may value a different number of boards per generation.
The board-count specification "1,3", for instance, means one board in the first
generation and three in the second. The shared cap on worker threads and the
cache of one play-value sheet per board were both sized from the first
generation's board count, so a later, larger generation was starved of threads
and cache slots and could stall where the generations synchronize. Both are now
sized from the largest generation instead. This changes only the thread count
on uneven specifications; the leaves are identical, because each board seeds
its own randomness from its own slot, so the result never depends on how many
threads happened to run.

A census can also resume from per-generation snapshot files, picking up at the
generation after the last one saved. If the specification given on resume asks
for fewer generations than the snapshots already on disk, the resume index
would run off the end of the specification and a worker would panic. It now
stops with a clear error -- extend the specification or remove the snapshots --
instead of crashing. Fresh runs are unaffected.

Finally, the census window's bounds -- the range of unseen-pool sizes it
studies --
are derived from the game configuration rather than hand-picked for the English
game, so they carry over to any tile-set. The low end is the endgame floor
established earlier: one more than the tiles both players hold at once, the
smallest pool that still leaves a non-empty bag (below it the bag is empty and
the leave table is not consulted). The high end is the tile count minus the
tiles both players hold (boards with at least that many tiles already played).
For the classic two-player English game this widens the default window from an
unseen pool of 21 to 28 tiles out to 15 to 86. The method actually supports
every board but the all-empty one; the default stops short of the near-empty
opening boards because the value of leaves there is unsettled. WOLGES_POOL_MIN
and WOLGES_POOL_MAX still override, and a too-small WOLGES_POOL_MIN is raised
to the floor with a warning rather than silently valuing endgame boards whose
leaves are never used.


WEIGHTING FULL RACKS BY THE WHOLE BAG

The full-rack census only credits a rack on boards where its tiles are still in
the bag, so a rack full of rare or high-value tiles is valued only on early,
near-full boards -- a thin, lopsided sample. As a step toward making the census
comparable to self-play, WOLGES_CENSUS_GLOBAL_WEIGHTS (default off, and off is
byte-for-byte the same table) scores every rack by its odds of being drawn from
the full starting bag, the same for every board no matter how picked-over this
one is, and it also values racks this board could not deal at all, since their
tiles can still be played somewhere. It builds each board's play-value sheet
over the whole bag so a depleted rack still gets a real best play, and weights
each rack by the whole-bag draw odds instead of this board's leftover pool.

It comes out a no-op. A rack's best value on a board does not depend on the
pool, so racks that were already drawable here keep the exact same value; only
board-impossible racks are newly added, and those are a small, rarely-decisive
share of the table. In our own head-to-head english-compare reports 49.9996 at
confidence 50.5 -- an even split, no measurable difference. Kept opt-in as a
recorded dead-end.

New knobs: WOLGES_CENSUS_GLOBAL_WEIGHTS.


A SELF-PLAY-SHAPED RACK SUMMARY

The full-rack census and the self-play sampler build the same kind of table two
different ways, and the one difference that remains is how each weights a rack.
The census weights a full rack by the number of ways the pool can deal all of
that rack's tiles at once and apportions that value onto every leave the rack
contains. The self-play sampler logs each rack it draws once, and
english-generate later weights each rack only by ways(R, S), the draw-ways of
its missing tiles. WOLGES_CENSUS_RACK_SUMMARY (default off, byte-identical)
pins that one difference down: it values each full rack once per board (its
exact best play, with no full-rack draw weight), averages across boards, and
then, instead of apportioning and writing a klv, writes the census result in
exactly the file the self-play sampler produces -- a total row, then one row
per rack of the rack, its total best-play value in points, and the number of
boards. Feeding that to english-generate reproduces the self-play pipeline but
with the exact per-board best in place of sampled racks, so whatever gap
remains between the two tables is exactly this full-rack draw weighting.

Coverage matches the forcing path from the start. With WOLGES_IMPOSSIBLE_OK on
(the default) the rack summary stops restricting to drawable racks, builds each
board's play sheet over the whole bag so a board-impossible rack still gets a
real best play, and at the end drops only the racks impossible even from the
full bag (needing more of a tile than exists, such as seven of the same rare
tile), whose completions are zero and which english-generate would discard
anyway. Set WOLGES_IMPOSSIBLE_OK=0 for drawable racks only.

The rack summary is not the stronger table. In our own head-to-head against the
default full-rack census english-compare reports 49.9842 at confidence 67.2 --
a tie, if anything a hair behind. So the full-rack draw weighting the census
does by default is not costing it anything; the two roads to a leave table
arrive at the same quality. Kept opt-in.

New knobs: WOLGES_CENSUS_RACK_SUMMARY.


REAL OPENING RACKS IN THE SUMMARY

The rack summary values every rack on every board inside the operating window,
but that window never lands on the near-empty opening boards -- the one place
its coverage falls short of the self-play sampler, which plays whole games from
the very first move. WOLGES_OPENING_SAMPLES (default off, and only meaningful
with the rack summary on) grafts the missing opening coverage on: while the
sampler greedily plays each board's game up to its target board, it records the
real rack actually held at every earlier turn as one extra summary row, valued
by that turn's greedy best play. The target board itself is still valued
exactly by the census and its own rack is never recorded, so nothing is
double-counted. WOLGES_OPENING_WEIGHT (default 1) counts each opening row that
many times: a rack already carries one value per board, hundreds of them, so a
single weight-1 opening row barely moves its average, and the weight lets you
turn the opening signal up to see whether giving it more say helps.

It does not. In our own head-to-head no opening weight beats the plain
uniform-board rack summary; the best result is a tie. The opening mix is not
the gap between the census and self-play. Kept opt-in as a recorded dead-end. A
fresh head-to-head bears this out: opening off versus on is a coin flip at the
natural weight of 1 (49.9991, confidence 51) and still a tie even with the
opening signal amplified 256-fold (49.9923, confidence 56).

New knobs: WOLGES_OPENING_SAMPLES, WOLGES_OPENING_WEIGHT.


HOW MANY BOARDS IS ENOUGH -- THE CONFIDENCE INTERVAL

The census values a fixed number of boards. Is that too many, or too few?
Answering it needs a confidence interval on each measured value (the range the
true value likely sits in): a range around the average, wide enough that the
true average -- the number you would get from every board rather than a sample
of them -- is very likely inside it. The interval's width is what matters. It
says how much the reported value could still wobble if you had happened to
sample a different set of boards; a narrow interval means the average is well
pinned down, a wide one means it is not. This is the same idea as the
confidence on a compare result, applied to a single value rather than to a win
share.

WOLGES_CENSUS_CI_REPORT switches on a diagnostic that measures this and changes
no leaves (off, the census is byte-identical). It accepts three values: off
(the default), rack, and leave; any other value stops with a clear error. On
rack it keeps, for each rack, a running total and a running total of squares of
the best-play values it saw across boards -- kept off the hot path and not
allocated at all unless the diagnostic is on -- and from those computes how
much the value bounces from board to board. The half-width of each interval is
that board-to-board bounce turned into a range through the same normal-curve
model the compare uses: the per-board bounce, divided by the square root of the
number of boards (so the interval narrows as more boards are sampled), times a
multiplier read off the normal curve for the chosen confidence.
WOLGES_CENSUS_CI_CONF sets that confidence (default 0.999).
WOLGES_CENSUS_CI_TARGET sets a target width in millipoints -- thousandths of a
point -- with a default of 500, which is half a point. At the end the census
prints, to standard error, the range of the intervals and, for each value not
inside the target, an estimate of how many boards it would take to get there
(the width shrinks with the square root of the board count, so reaching a
target width of a given size takes a predictable multiple of the boards sampled
so far).

One caution the diagnostic cannot escape: the interval tells you how tightly
you have measured an average, not whether it is the right average to measure. A
wrong mix of boards would still report a tight interval, just around a wrong
number.

The finding, on the English game: aiming for a tight interval on each
individual rack wants far more boards than the census actually samples, because
a single rack's best play is noisy from board to board. But the table does not
store rack values; it stores leaves, and a leave is an average over many racks,
so it is far more pinned down than any one rack. WOLGES_CENSUS_CI_REPORT=leave
reports the tighter, correct target: it apportions each rack's board-to-board
bounce down onto the leaves through the very same completion weighting the
english-generate decompose uses, so a leave's interval is the wobble of its own
weighted average. (An exact routine walks every rack-and-kept-combination pair
to do this, checked against a slow brute-force computation by a unit test.) The
confidence and target knobs apply the same way, and rack still prints the
per-rack report. The leaves come out several times tighter than the racks, so
aiming at the per-leave interval needs far fewer boards than a per-rack target
would demand. That per-leave interval is the accuracy target worth chasing: it
reports, honestly, how tightly the leaves themselves have been measured.

New knobs: WOLGES_CENSUS_CI_CONF, WOLGES_CENSUS_CI_REPORT,
WOLGES_CENSUS_CI_TARGET.


STOPPING ONCE THE LEAVES HAVE SETTLED

Given a per-leave interval, the census no longer has to grind out a preset
board count. Often about half the boards already produce settled, same-quality
leaves, and the rest is wasted work. WOLGES_CENSUS_CI_STOP_FRAC (default 0.0,
which is off and byte-identical to the fixed count) is the fraction of leaves
that must sit inside their target interval before the pass stops early; any
value above zero turns the stop on. Every WOLGES_CENSUS_CI_STOP_EVERY boards
(default 64) exactly one worker runs the per-leave interval check; once the
fraction inside reaches the target it raises a shared flag and every worker
breaks out of the board loop. It is a single global stop, not a per-leave one
-- one sampled board values every rack, so there is no way to stop measuring
one leave while another keeps going; a single threshold ends the whole pass.
The board count on the command line stays a hard cap, so if the target is never
reached the pass still ends there, exactly as before. The stop is available on
the rack-summary path, which is what tracks the per-rack bounce the leave
intervals are built from.

In a fresh head-to-head the adaptive stop ended well short of the fixed count
and showed no meaningful quality difference. Against a 2048-board cap the stop
met its target and ended at 576 boards, and the table it built ties the
full-cap table (50.01, confidence 60). This is a cost feature, not a
leave-quality change: the same table, in a fraction of the boards. (The
accuracy check that drives the stop reuses one set of scratch buffers across
checks instead of rebuilding catalog-sized arrays each time, so turning the
stop on does not thrash memory; with the stop off the buffers stay empty and
nothing is allocated.)

New knobs: WOLGES_CENSUS_CI_STOP_EVERY, WOLGES_CENSUS_CI_STOP_FRAC.


A SELF-ITERATING RACK SUMMARY

The rack summary began as a single pass that had to hand its file to a separate
english-generate step to turn per-rack values into per-leave values. The
ordinary apportioning census already iterates on its own -- each pass sharpens
the leaves, and the next pass re-values the racks under the sharper leaves
until the leaves reproduce themselves when fed back in -- but the rack summary
could not, because it handed the per-leave breakdown off to the external step.
It now does that breakdown in-process, so it can run several passes by itself.
An exact routine apportions each valued rack's average down onto every kept
combination with the same completion weighting english-generate uses, centered
so that keeping nothing is worth zero -- a value-carrying twin of the per-leave
interval routine, and likewise checked against a brute force by a unit test. At
each generation boundary the rack-summary census builds its leaves this way,
the next pass values racks under them, and the last pass writes the klv
directly. A single-generation run still writes the summary file, so that path
is unchanged. With WOLGES_IMPOSSIBLE_OK on the exhaustive census reaches every
globally-possible leave, so a multi-pass run matches the full table the
external english-generate would produce; without it, a sparse drawable-only run
leaves the leaves it never reached at their prior value. As with the
apportioning multi-pass, it never smooths or fills in leaves it did not
measure.


VALUING A PLAY BY ITS CHANCE OF WINNING

Every method so far values a play by its equity -- the points it scores on the
board plus the value of the leave it keeps -- and picks the play with the most
equity. But points are only a stand-in for the thing that actually decides a
game, which is winning it. This section tries to skip the stand-in and value a
play directly by how often it leads to a win.

The chance of winning is written "win%": the probability that the player to
move eventually wins this game, a number from 0 (a certain loss) through 0.5
(an even game) to 1 (a certain win), with a tie counted as half a win. It is
learned empirically -- that is, measured by watching many real games finish,
not read off a hand-tuned formula.

wolges already carries such a hand-tuned formula elsewhere in the engine: an
S-shaped curve that turns a point lead into a win-chance guess (a small lead
reads near 0.5, a large lead flattens out near 0 or 1). The idea here is to
replace that guess with a table measured from our own play, and then to see
whether valuing racks by that measured win chance builds a better leave table
than valuing them by points.


THE WIN% TABLE, MEASURED FROM SELF-PLAY

The table is keyed by the count-state a position is in: the triple (tiles left
in the bag, my rack size, the opponent's rack size). Keeping the two rack sizes
separate, rather than collapsing everything into one "tiles unseen" number,
lets the table tell the endgame apart from the midgame -- which is exactly
where the win chance stops tracking the points and starts depending on who is
about to run out of tiles.

For each count-state the table stores, as a plain integer tally, how much the
point lead swung from that moment to the end of the game, measured from the
mover's side. It leans on one trick that only works because the games are
played statically -- each side always just takes its single highest-equity
move, with no lookahead. With static play the rest of a game does not depend on
the lead at a given moment, so a single finished game tells you the outcome for
every hypothetical lead it could have had at every position it passed through:
a position with lead s wins exactly when the remaining swing comes out above
-s. One game therefore informs the whole curve at once.

Reading the table folds each swing together with its mirror image, so a
dead-even position reads as exactly 0.5 and a lead of s and a deficit of s
always add to 1. A lead past anything ever observed for that count-state
saturates to a sure win or a sure loss, and a count-state that was never
sampled returns 0.5. The tallies are integer counts, so two runs combine by
simply adding them -- no rounding error from splitting the work across
machines.


RECORDING AND GRADING THE TABLE

Two command-line tools build and check the table.

  cargo run --release --bin leave -- \
    english-winpct CSW24.kwg leave.klv2 1000000

plays that many greedy self-play games with the given leave table ("-" for the
null table) and writes the raw win% table. At every turn it snapshots the
mover's view -- bag size, both rack sizes, and the lead in whole points -- and
after the game folds each snapshot's eventual swing into the tally. Games are
seeded by game number, so the same seed and game count reproduce the same table
no matter how many threads run it.

  cargo run --release --bin leave -- \
    english-winpct-eval CSW24.kwg leave.klv2 table.csv 1000000

grades a finished table against fresh games. For every snapshot it compares
both the table's win-chance and the old hand-tuned formula's guess against what
actually happened (a win counts 1, a loss 0, a tie one half), and reports each
one's Brier score -- the average of the squared gap between the predicted
chance and the real outcome, where lower is better. Grade with a different
(held-out) seed so the table is not judged on the very games that trained it.

The measured table is a slightly better predictor than the hand-tuned formula:
about 0.170 to the formula's 0.172, a hair lower (lower is better). Those
figures come from english-winpct-eval grading each table on held-out self-play
-- a different seed than the table was built on -- not from a head-to-head
leave comparison. The margin is small, but the direction is what counts: a
table read straight off played-out games predicts winners a touch better than a
formula nobody had to hand-tune.


BEST CURRENT WAY TO RUN EACH METHOD

This section stays current: whatever the defaults have become, it shows how to
get the most competitive leaves out of each method. Each recipe is one command
(indented) followed by a note on how to push it further. If you only want a
good table, use the census.

Census -- exact, and the one to use. It values every leave on a board exactly,
then averages over many boards.

    cargo run --release --bin leave -- english-census CSW24.kwg - - 4x256

4 generations of 256 boards settles the leaves: adding more boards or
generations no longer moves the table. That 256 is measured on this English
word list, not a universal constant; for a different tile set, let the run
size itself with the adaptive stop (WOLGES_CENSUS_CI_STOP_FRAC, in the
confidence-interval section earlier in this file), which ends a run once the
leaves have settled to a target width instead of at a preset count.
WOLGES_POOL_* shift the board window; for dynamic leaves add WOLGES_FULL=1 to
keep the full-length values.

Board sampling (gilles) -- sample-efficient, a touch slower, no stronger. It
manufactures rare racks by snapshotting midgame boards.

    ./genleaves.sh --gilles english english 2000000 2000000 2000000

Its snapshot heuristics are the WOLGES_POOL_* and WOLGES_GILLES_* knobs. The
genleaves.sh arguments are explained under RUNNING GENLEAVES.SH below.

Self-play autoplay -- wolges's original baseline. It plays games and learns
from the racks held.

    ./genleaves.sh english english 2000000 2000000 2000000

It forces the rare tail by default; add genleaves.sh's --no-forcing option for
plain natural sampling. The genleaves.sh arguments are explained under RUNNING
GENLEAVES.SH below.

Whole-game rollout -- a recorded negative, kept for reference. It credits whole
finished games to the racks held; too noisy to beat the census.

    cargo run --release --bin leave -- english-rollout CSW24.kwg - 1000000

RUNNING GENLEAVES.SH

The autoplay and board-sampling recipes above are driven by the genleaves.sh
script, which runs the whole build loop (play a generation, summarize,
decompose, compile, then play the next generation with the table just built):

    ./genleaves.sh [options] <play-config> <leave-config> <count-per-gen>...

play-config is the tile distribution to play games with (english, norwegian,
super-english, and so on); leave-config is the distribution the leave table is
compiled for. They are usually the same, which is why the examples read
"english english". Each trailing number is one generation's game count, so
three numbers means three generations; append :N to a count to ask for N
samples of every rack that generation.

Options, each written before the configs:
  --gilles      collect samples by board sampling instead of self-play autoplay
  --no-forcing  turn off autoplay's full-rack forcing, reverting to plain
                natural sampling (ignored under --gilles)
  --full        also write the full-length leaves (what dynamic leaves read)


ENVIRONMENT KNOBS

A bare run already does the right thing; these are for experiments, tuning, or
reproduction. Each shows its type and default in parentheses; a knob with a
fixed set of values lists what each one does. EN is the classic two-player
English game.

Every run:
  WOLGES_THREADS (a whole number; default the core count) -- worker threads for
    every parallel run and for english-compare; changes only speed, never the
    table.

Decompose (english-generate):
  WOLGES_GENERATE_PER_RACK (0 or 1; default 1) -- how the english-generate
    decompose weights each rack; applies to any autoplay or board-sampling
    summary:
      1  weight each distinct rack once, by its draw-ways (per-rack)
      0  also multiply by the rack's sampled count (per-occurrence), which
         double-counts draw frequency

Shared across builders:
  WOLGES_APPORTION (full-rack or entering; default full-rack) -- how a board's
    value becomes leave values; read by the census and by autoplay's recording:
      full-rack  credit every subrack of each rack (the complete attribution)
      entering   credit only the leave carried into the turn
  WOLGES_IMPOSSIBLE_OK (0 or 1; default 1) -- whether to value a rack the board
    cannot currently deal; read by autoplay's forcing, board sampling's draw
    source, and the rack-summary census:
      1  force the rack's tiles onto the board, so rare racks still get covered
      0  record only what the board could really deal
  WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_EXACT (a decimal weight; default 0.0, off) -- weight on the
    exact joint opponent correction folded into each drawn rack's value. 0.0
    disables it.
  WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_EXACT_ME2 (a decimal; default 1.0) -- scales the
    holder's-recovery half of the joint correction: 1.0 keeps it in full, 0.0
    keeps only the opponent's expectation, values between temper it; read only
    when WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_EXACT is nonzero.
  WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_EXACT_POOL_MAX (a whole number of tiles; default 32) --
    largest unseen pool on which the exact joint term is computed; larger
    boards skip it.
  WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_LEAVE (a decimal weight; default 0.0, off) -- weight on the
    per-letter opponent-denial term, folded into the finished table through a
    companion file; read by all three builders. 0.0 disables it. A recorded
    dead-end.
  WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_LEAVE_MARGINAL (a file path; default
    oppdenial-leave-marginal.csv) -- the companion per-letter file, written
    only when WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_LEAVE is nonzero.
  WOLGES_OPPDENIAL_RACK (a decimal weight; default 0.0, off) -- the same
    per-letter drop folded into each drawn rack's recorded value instead of
    through a file. 0.0 disables it.

Board sampling (gilles):
  It also reads the shared knobs above. Its own knobs:
  WOLGES_GILLES_DRAWS (a whole number; default 10) -- random groups drawn per
    snapshot before keeping the least likely one.
  WOLGES_GILLES_GROUP (a whole number of tiles; default two rack-sizes minus
    one, 13 EN) -- worst-group size drawn per snapshot.
  WOLGES_GILLES_REAL_RACK (off, all-turns, or in-window; default off) --
    besides the manufactured racks, whether to also record the real rack held
    each turn. A no-op measured at par:
      off        the plain method, no real racks recorded
      all-turns  record the real rack held every turn
      in-window  record it only while the board sits in the snapshot window
  WOLGES_GILLES_REAL_RACK_WEIGHT (a whole number; default 1) -- counts each
    real-rack sample this many times.
  WOLGES_GILLES_RESERVE (0 or 1; default 0) -- only with a nonzero min-sample
    target:
      1  hold the tiles the uncovered racks need out of the deal, so they
         become drawable in the window
      0  deal every game normally
  WOLGES_GILLES_RESERVE_BUDGET (a whole number of tiles; default what the bag
    can spare) -- how many tiles the reserve may hold back at once.
  WOLGES_GILLES_STRIDE (a whole number; default 3) -- turns between snapshots.
  WOLGES_POOL_MAX (a whole number of tiles; default the tile count minus
    WOLGES_POOL_MIN, 75 EN) -- high edge of the snapshot window.
  WOLGES_POOL_MIN (a whole number of tiles; default a quarter of the tile
    count, 25 EN) -- low edge of the snapshot window, counted in tiles not yet
    on the board. The census reads the same variable with its own default
    window.

Census:
  It also reads the shared knobs above and the board window WOLGES_POOL_MIN /
  WOLGES_POOL_MAX (listed under board sampling, but with the census's own
  default window). Its own knobs:
  WOLGES_CENSUS_ALPHA (a decimal from 0 to 1; default 0.5) -- how far the
    leaves move toward each batch's findings; meaningful only with a batch
    smaller than the run.
  WOLGES_CENSUS_BATCH (a whole number of boards; default all boards, one batch)
    -- boards per online-update batch; a smaller batch nudges the leaves toward
    each batch's findings mid-run.
  WOLGES_CENSUS_BLANK_CAP (a whole number; default a full rack's worth) -- cap
    on blanks in the sheet's unseen pool, to measure the blank cost on its own.
  WOLGES_CENSUS_BUCKETS (a whole number; default 0, every fill level) --
    coarsen the fill-level cycle to this many evenly spaced levels; changes
    only the spacing, not the leaves.
  WOLGES_CENSUS_CI_CONF (a decimal probability from 0 to 1; default 0.999) --
    confidence level for the interval.
  WOLGES_CENSUS_CI_REPORT (off, rack, or leave; default off) -- a diagnostic
    that changes no leaves and also estimates the boards needed to reach a
    target width:
      off    no report
      rack   report how tightly each rack has been measured
      leave  report how tightly each leave has been measured (several times
             tighter -- the real target)
  WOLGES_CENSUS_CI_STOP_EVERY (a whole number of boards; default 64) -- boards
    between adaptive-stop checks.
  WOLGES_CENSUS_CI_STOP_FRAC (a decimal fraction; default 0.0, off) -- fraction
    of leaves that must sit inside their target interval before the pass stops
    early; the command-line board count stays a hard cap. 0.0 disables the
    early stop.
  WOLGES_CENSUS_CI_TARGET (a whole number of millipoints; default 500) --
    target interval width in millipoints (thousandths of a point).
  WOLGES_CENSUS_GLOBAL_WEIGHTS (0 or 1; default 0) -- how racks are weighted.
    Measured a no-op:
      1  weight every rack by full-starting-bag draw odds, and value
         board-impossible racks too
      0  weight by this board's leftover pool
  WOLGES_CENSUS_PER_GAME (0 or 1; default 0) -- how boards are chosen:
      1  value every in-window board along one real game per worker (the board
         count then counts games)
      0  play a fresh game per board
  WOLGES_CENSUS_RACK_SUMMARY (0 or 1; default 0) -- the output form; isolates
    the full-rack draw weighting. Measured a tie:
      1  value each full rack once per board and write the self-play summary
         file
      0  apportion and write a klv directly
  WOLGES_CENSUS_SCATTER (off, on, or auto; default auto) -- how the census
    finds each rack's best play; the values are identical, speed only:
      off   search each rack's play-and-keep splits
      on    scatter each playable word's score onto the racks that could play
            it
      auto  on for the common alphabets and big pools, off elsewhere
  WOLGES_CENSUS_VERIFY (0 or 1; default 0) -- whether to cross-check the census
    against the live move generator on the first board:
      1  run the cross-check
      0  skip it
  WOLGES_CENSUS_WITHHOLD (a whole number of tiles; default 0, off) -- hold this
    many of the rarest tiles out of the bag for the whole game so rare-tile
    racks appear in the sampled boards; 0 disables it. A recorded dead-end.
  WOLGES_CENSUS_WITHHOLD_FRAC (a decimal in (0, 1]; default 1.0, every board)
    -- fraction of boards that withhold; below 1.0, only every (1/f)-th board
    does, spaced across the fill levels.
  WOLGES_CENSUS_ZETA_POOL (a whole number, a pool size; default 36 EN) --
    unseen-pool size at or above which the full-rack hand-out uses fixed-cost
    table passes; speed only.
  WOLGES_FULL (0 or 1; default 0) -- whether to keep the full-length leave rows
    (a value for the whole rack, not just a shorter leave); a full-length table
    is what dynamic leaves read:
      1  also write the full-length values
      0  drop them, giving a smaller, play-identical file
  WOLGES_OPENING_SAMPLES (0 or 1; default 0; only with the rack summary on) --
    whether to add opening-board coverage. A dead-end:
      1  also record the real rack held at each earlier turn
      0  record only the target boards
  WOLGES_OPENING_WEIGHT (a whole number; default 1) -- how many times each
    opening row is counted.

Autoplay:
  It also reads the shared knobs above. Its own knob:
  WOLGES_AUTOPLAY_FULL_RACK_FORCING (0 or 1; default 0; the genleaves autoplay
    recipe turns it on) -- how autoplay forces the rare tail; sound only
    alongside the per-rack decompose. genleaves.sh's --no-forcing option turns
    it back off:
      1  force whole undersampled racks into the main rack tally, like a
         natural sample
      0  target undersampled subracks in a side list

Whole-game rollout:
  It also reads WOLGES_THREADS. Its own knobs:
  WOLGES_ROLLOUT_CV (0 or 1; default 0) -- how each leave is credited:
      1  credit the game margin minus the census one-move value of that turn's
         rack
      0  credit the raw game margin
  WOLGES_ROLLOUT_LAMBDA (a decimal from 0 to 1; unset by default, off) -- when
    unset the dial is not applied; set it to any value from 0.0 to 1.0 to turn
    it on -- credit a leave only from the turn it is held onward, on a dial
    from the real outcome in full (1.0) to the census one-move value (toward
    0.0). Overrides WOLGES_ROLLOUT_CV.
  WOLGES_ROLLOUT_SHRINK (a whole number; default 0) -- how many samples a leave
    needs before its whole-game value is trusted over the census fallback; 0 is
    the pure rollout with no fallback.

Compare and dynamic leaves:
  WOLGES_COMPARE_PORCELAIN (0 or 1; default 0) -- english-compare's output;
    changes no table:
      1  append a machine-readable result block after the normal output
      0  print the human-readable output only
